.opencode/skills/git-commit/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: git-commit
description: Create well-formatted commits with conventional commit messages and emoji
license: MIT
compatibility: opencode
metadata:
  audience: all
  workflow: git
---

# Commit Command

You are an AI agent that helps create well-formatted git commits with conventional commit messages and emoji icons, follow these instructions exactly. Always run and push the commit, you don't need to ask for confirmation unless there is a big issue or error.

## Instructions for Agent

When this skill is used, execute the following workflow:

1. **Check command mode**:
   - If user provides $ARGUMENTS (a simple message), skip to step 3
   
2. **Analyze git status**:
   - Run `git status --porcelain` to check for changes
   - If no files are staged, run `git add .` to stage all modified files
   - If files are already staged, proceed with only those files
   
3. **Analyze the changes**:
   - Run `git diff --cached` to see what will be committed
   - Analyze the diff to determine the primary change type (feat, fix, docs, etc.)
   - Identify the main scope and purpose of the changes
   
4. **Generate commit message**:
   - Choose appropriate emoji and type from the reference below
   - Create message following format: `<emoji> <type>: <description>`
   - Keep description concise, clear, and in imperative mood
   - Show the proposed message to user for confirmation
   
5. **Execute the commit**:
   - Run `git commit -m "<generated message>"`
   - Display the commit hash and confirm success
   - Provide brief summary of what was committed

## Commit Message Guidelines

When generating commit messages, follow these rules:

- **Atomic commits**: Each commit should contain related changes that serve a single purpose
- **Imperative mood**: Write as commands (e.g., "add feature" not "added feature")
- **Concise first line**: Keep under 72 characters
- **Conventional format**: Use `<emoji> <type>: <description>` where type is one of:
  - `feat`: A new feature
  - `fix`: A bug fix
  - `docs`: Documentation changes
  - `style`: Code style changes (formatting, etc.)
  - `refactor`: Code changes that neither fix bugs nor add features
  - `perf`: Performance improvements
  - `test`: Adding or fixing tests
  - `chore`: Changes to the build process, tools, etc.
- **Present tense, imperative mood**: Write commit messages as commands (e.g., "add feature" not "added feature")
- **Concise first line**: Keep the first line under 72 characters
- **Emoji**: Each commit type is paired with an appropriate emoji:
  - ✨ `feat`: New feature
  - 🐛 `fix`: Bug fix
  - 📝 `docs`: Documentation
  - 💄 `style`: Formatting/style
  - ♻️ `refactor`: Code refactoring
  - ⚡️ `perf`: Performance improvements
  - ✅ `test`: Tests
  - 🔧 `chore`: Tooling, configuration
  - 🚀 `ci`: CI/CD improvements
  - 🗑️ `revert`: Reverting changes
  - 🧪 `test`: Add a failing test
  - 🚨 `fix`: Fix compiler/linter warnings
  - 🔒️ `fix`: Fix security issues
  - 👥 `chore`: Add or update contributors
  - 🚚 `refactor`: Move or rename resources
  - 🏗️ `refactor`: Make architectural changes
  - 🔀 `chore`: Merge branches
  - 📦️ `chore`: Add or update compiled files or packages
  - ➕ `chore`: Add a dependency
  - ➖ `chore`: Remove a dependency
  - 🌱 `chore`: Add or update seed files
  - 🧑‍💻 `chore`: Improve developer experience
  - 🧵 `feat`: Add or update code related to multithreading or concurrency
  - 🔍️ `feat`: Improve SEO
  - 🏷️ `feat`: Add or update types
  - 💬 `feat`: Add or update text and literals
  - 🌐 `feat`: Internationalization and localization
  - 👔 `feat`: Add or update business logic
  - 📱 `feat`: Work on responsive design
  - 🚸 `feat`: Improve user experience / usability
  - 🩹 `fix`: Simple fix for a non-critical issue
  - 🥅 `fix`: Catch errors
  - 👽️ `fix`: Update code due to external API changes
  - 🔥 `fix`: Remove code or files
  - 🎨 `style`: Improve structure/format of the code
  - 🚑️ `fix`: Critical hotfix
  - 🎉 `chore`: Begin a project
  - 🔖 `chore`: Release/Version tags
  - 🚧 `wip`: Work in progress
  - 💚 `fix`: Fix CI build
  - 📌 `chore`: Pin dependencies to specific versions
  - 👷 `ci`: Add or update CI build system
  - 📈 `feat`: Add or update analytics or tracking code
  - ✏️ `fix`: Fix typos
  - ⏪️ `revert`: Revert changes
  - 📄 `chore`: Add or update license
  - 💥 `feat`: Introduce breaking changes
  - 🍱 `assets`: Add or update assets
  - ♿️ `feat`: Improve accessibility
  - 💡 `docs`: Add or update comments in source code
  - 🗃️ `db`: Perform database related changes
  - 🔊 `feat`: Add or update logs
  - 🔇 `fix`: Remove logs
  - 🤡 `test`: Mock things
  - 🥚 `feat`: Add or update an easter egg
  - 🙈 `chore`: Add or update .gitignore file
  - 📸 `test`: Add or update snapshots
  - ⚗️ `experiment`: Perform experiments
  - 🚩 `feat`: Add, update, or remove feature flags
  - 💫 `ui`: Add or update animations and transitions
  - ⚰️ `refactor`: Remove dead code
  - 🦺 `feat`: Add or update code related to validation
  - ✈️ `feat`: Improve offline support

## Reference: Good Commit Examples

Use these as examples when generating commit messages:
- ✨ feat: add user authentication system
- 🐛 fix: resolve memory leak in rendering process
- 📝 docs: update API documentation with new endpoints
- ♻️ refactor: simplify error handling logic in parser
- 🚨 fix: resolve linter warnings in component files
- 🧑‍💻 chore: improve developer tooling setup process
- 👔 feat: implement business logic for transaction validation
- 🩹 fix: address minor styling inconsistency in header
- 🚑️ fix: patch critical security vulnerability in auth flow
- 🎨 style: reorganize component structure for better readability
- 🔥 fix: remove deprecated legacy code
- 🦺 feat: add input validation for user registration form
- 💚 fix: resolve failing CI pipeline tests
- 📈 feat: implement analytics tracking for user engagement
- 🔒️ `fix`: strengthen authentication password requirements
- ♿️ `feat`: improve form accessibility for screen readers

Example commit sequence:
- ✨ feat: add user authentication system
- 🐛 fix: resolve memory leak in rendering process  
- 📝 docs: update API documentation with new endpoints
- ♻️ refactor: simplify error handling logic in parser
- 🚨 fix: resolve linter warnings in component files
- ✅ test: add unit tests for authentication flow

## Agent Behavior Notes

- **Error handling**: If validation fails, give user option to proceed or fix issues first  
- **Auto-staging**: If no files are staged, automatically stage all changes with `git add .`
- **File priority**: If files are already staged, only commit those specific files
- **Always run and push the commit**: You don't need to ask for confirmation unless there is a big issue or error `git push`.
- **Message quality**: Ensure commit messages are clear, concise, and follow conventional format
- **Success feedback**: After successful commit, show commit hash and brief summary

Commit message:

🔧 chore: enforce atomic and separate commits in git-commit skill

.opencode/skills/git-commit/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: git-commit
description: Create well-formatted commits with conventional commit messages and emoji
license: MIT
compatibility: opencode
metadata:
  audience: all
  workflow: git
---

# Commit Command

You are an AI agent that helps create well-formatted git commits with conventional commit messages and emoji icons, follow these instructions exactly. Always run and push the commit, you don't need to ask for confirmation unless there is a big issue or error.

## Instructions for Agent

When this skill is used, execute the following workflow:

1. **Check command mode**:
   - If user provides $ARGUMENTS (a simple message), skip to step 3
   
2. **Analyze git status**:
   - Run `git status --porcelain` to check for changes
   - If no files are staged, run `git add .` to stage all modified files
   - If files are already staged, proceed with only those files
   
3. **Analyze the changes**:
   - Run `git diff --cached` to see what will be committed
   - Analyze the diff to determine the primary change type (feat, fix, docs, etc.)
   - Identify the main scope and purpose of the changes
   
4. **Generate commit message**:
   - Choose appropriate emoji and type from the reference below
   - Create message following format: `<emoji> <type>: <description>`
   - Keep description concise, clear, and in imperative mood
   - Show the proposed message to user for confirmation
   
5. **Execute the commit**:
   - Run `git commit -m "<generated message>"`
   - Display the commit hash and confirm success
   - Provide brief summary of what was committed

## Commit Message Guidelines

When generating commit messages, follow these rules:

- **Atomic commits**: Each commit should contain related changes that serve a single purpose. NEVER include unrelated changes (e.g., mixing documentation with infrastructure config) in a single commit.
- **Batching**: If multiple unrelated files are modified, stage and commit them in separate batches based on their shared purpose.
- **Imperative mood**: Write as commands (e.g., "add feature" not "added feature")
- **Concise first line**: Keep under 72 characters
- **Conventional format**: Use `<emoji> <type>: <description>` where type is one of:
  - `feat`: A new feature
  - `fix`: A bug fix
  - `docs`: Documentation changes
  - `style`: Code style changes (formatting, etc.)
  - `refactor`: Code changes that neither fix bugs nor add features
  - `perf`: Performance improvements
  - `test`: Adding or fixing tests
  - `chore`: Changes to the build process, tools, etc.
- **Present tense, imperative mood**: Write commit messages as commands (e.g., "add feature" not "added feature")
- **Concise first line**: Keep the first line under 72 characters
- **Emoji**: Each commit type is paired with an appropriate emoji:
  - ✨ `feat`: New feature
  - 🐛 `fix`: Bug fix
  - 📝 `docs`: Documentation
  - 💄 `style`: Formatting/style
  - ♻️ `refactor`: Code refactoring
  - ⚡️ `perf`: Performance improvements
  - ✅ `test`: Tests
  - 🔧 `chore`: Tooling, configuration
  - 🚀 `ci`: CI/CD improvements
  - 🗑️ `revert`: Reverting changes
  - 🧪 `test`: Add a failing test
  - 🚨 `fix`: Fix compiler/linter warnings
  - 🔒️ `fix`: Fix security issues
  - 👥 `chore`: Add or update contributors
  - 🚚 `refactor`: Move or rename resources
  - 🏗️ `refactor`: Make architectural changes
  - 🔀 `chore`: Merge branches
  - 📦️ `chore`: Add or update compiled files or packages
  - ➕ `chore`: Add a dependency
  - ➖ `chore`: Remove a dependency
  - 🌱 `chore`: Add or update seed files
  - 🧑‍💻 `chore`: Improve developer experience
  - 🧵 `feat`: Add or update code related to multithreading or concurrency
  - 🔍️ `feat`: Improve SEO
  - 🏷️ `feat`: Add or update types
  - 💬 `feat`: Add or update text and literals
  - 🌐 `feat`: Internationalization and localization
  - 👔 `feat`: Add or update business logic
  - 📱 `feat`: Work on responsive design
  - 🚸 `feat`: Improve user experience / usability
  - 🩹 `fix`: Simple fix for a non-critical issue
  - 🥅 `fix`: Catch errors
  - 👽️ `fix`: Update code due to external API changes
  - 🔥 `fix`: Remove code or files
  - 🎨 `style`: Improve structure/format of the code
  - 🚑️ `fix`: Critical hotfix
  - 🎉 `chore`: Begin a project
  - 🔖 `chore`: Release/Version tags
  - 🚧 `wip`: Work in progress
  - 💚 `fix`: Fix CI build
  - 📌 `chore`: Pin dependencies to specific versions
  - 👷 `ci`: Add or update CI build system
  - 📈 `feat`: Add or update analytics or tracking code
  - ✏️ `fix`: Fix typos
  - ⏪️ `revert`: Revert changes
  - 📄 `chore`: Add or update license
  - 💥 `feat`: Introduce breaking changes
  - 🍱 `assets`: Add or update assets
  - ♿️ `feat`: Improve accessibility
  - 💡 `docs`: Add or update comments in source code
  - 🗃️ `db`: Perform database related changes
  - 🔊 `feat`: Add or update logs
  - 🔇 `fix`: Remove logs
  - 🤡 `test`: Mock things
  - 🥚 `feat`: Add or update an easter egg
  - 🙈 `chore`: Add or update .gitignore file
  - 📸 `test`: Add or update snapshots
  - ⚗️ `experiment`: Perform experiments
  - 🚩 `feat`: Add, update, or remove feature flags
  - 💫 `ui`: Add or update animations and transitions
  - ⚰️ `refactor`: Remove dead code
  - 🦺 `feat`: Add or update code related to validation
  - ✈️ `feat`: Improve offline support

## Reference: Good Commit Examples

Use these as examples when generating commit messages:
- ✨ feat: add user authentication system
- 🐛 fix: resolve memory leak in rendering process
- 📝 docs: update API documentation with new endpoints
- ♻️ refactor: simplify error handling logic in parser
- 🚨 fix: resolve linter warnings in component files
- 🧑‍💻 chore: improve developer tooling setup process
- 👔 feat: implement business logic for transaction validation
- 🩹 fix: address minor styling inconsistency in header
- 🚑️ fix: patch critical security vulnerability in auth flow
- 🎨 style: reorganize component structure for better readability
- 🔥 fix: remove deprecated legacy code
- 🦺 feat: add input validation for user registration form
- 💚 fix: resolve failing CI pipeline tests
- 📈 feat: implement analytics tracking for user engagement
- 🔒️ `fix`: strengthen authentication password requirements
- ♿️ `feat`: improve form accessibility for screen readers

Example commit sequence:
- ✨ feat: add user authentication system
- 🐛 fix: resolve memory leak in rendering process  
- 📝 docs: update API documentation with new endpoints
- ♻️ refactor: simplify error handling logic in parser
- 🚨 fix: resolve linter warnings in component files
- ✅ test: add unit tests for authentication flow

## Agent Behavior Notes

- **Error handling**: If validation fails, give user option to proceed or fix issues first  
- **Auto-staging**: If no files are staged, automatically stage all changes with `git add .`
- **File priority**: If files are already staged, only commit those specific files
- **Always run and push the commit**: You don't need to ask for confirmation unless there is a big issue or error `git push`.
- **Message quality**: Ensure commit messages are clear, concise, and follow conventional format
- **Success feedback**: After successful commit, show commit hash and brief summary
