docs/media-converter.md, before:

# AV1 Media Converter

A Bun-based utility script to scan media libraries for legacy video codecs and convert them to modern AV1 format. This helps resolve transcoding issues in Jellyfin and reduces storage usage.

## Overview

The script targets several "legacy" codecs that often cause issues with modern hardware acceleration or player compatibility:
- `mpeg4` (Xvid, DivX)
- `msmpeg4v3`
- `mpeg2video` (DVD)
- `vc1` (Early Blu-ray)
- `theora`, `vp8`, `h263`, `flv1`, `rv40` (RealVideo)

It uses `ffprobe` to identify codecs and `ffmpeg` with the `libsvtav1` encoder for high-quality AV1 compression.

## Prerequisites

- **Bun**: To run the script.
- **FFmpeg**: Must be compiled with `libsvtav1` support.
- **FFprobe**: For media analysis.

## Usage

### On Skylab (NixOS)
The script is globally available on Skylab as `av1-converter`.

### On Local Computer (Global Installation)
To install the tool globally on your local machine using Bun:

```bash
cd scripts/av1-converter
bun add -g .
```

### Direct Execution
You can also run it using Bun directly:

```bash
# From the root of the repository
bun scripts/av1-converter/src/index.ts [options]
```

### Options

| Option | Alias | Description | Default |
|--------|-------|-------------|---------|
| `--dir` | `-d` | Directory to scan recursively | `.` |
| `--limit` | `-l` | Max number of files to convert | Infinity |
| `--dry-run` | | Scan and identify files without converting | `false` |
| `--preset` | | Encoding preset (ultrafast, medium, slow, etc.) | `medium` |
| `--crf` | | SVT-AV1 quality (0-63, lower is higher quality) | `24` |
| `--verbose` | `-v` | Show ffmpeg output and full command line | `false` |

### Understanding CRF and Preset

These two parameters control the balance between quality, file size, and encoding time.

#### 1. CRF (Constant Rate Factor)
- **Range**: `0` (lossless) to `63` (worst quality).
- **Function**: Ensures a constant perceptual quality level.
- **Recommendations**:
    - `18-24`: High quality, larger files.
    - `30`: The "sweet spot" for AV1 (excellent quality/size ratio).
    - `35+`: Noticeable compression artifacts, very small files.

#### 2. Preset
- **Options**: `ultrafast`, `superfast`, `veryfast`, `faster`, `fast`, `medium`, `slow`, `slower`, `veryslow`, `placebo`.
- **Function**: Determines how much "effort" the CPU spends on compression.
- **Recommendations**:
    - `medium`: (Default) Balanced. Best for archiving.
    - `fast` / `faster`: Much faster, good for quick conversions or less critical media.
    - `slow` / `slower`: Better compression, slower encoding.

| `--upscale-to`| | Upscale video if height is below target (e.g., `720p`) | None |
| `--delete-original`| | Delete the original file after success | `false` |

### Examples

**Dry run to see what would be converted:**
```bash
bun scripts/av1-converter/src/index.ts --dir /path/to/movies --dry-run
```

**Upscale old movies to 720p:**
```bash
bun scripts/av1-converter/src/index.ts --dir /path/to/movies --upscale-to 720p
```

**Convert 2 files for testing:**
```bash
bun scripts/av1-converter/src/index.ts --dir /path/to/movies --limit 2 --preset fast
```

**Full conversion with cleanup:**
```bash
bun scripts/av1-converter/src/index.ts --dir /share/Storage/Movies --delete-original
```

## Hardware Acceleration Note

On the **Skylab (Intel NUC Hades Canyon)**:
- **AV1 Encoding**: This hardware (Intel 8th Gen / AMD Vega M) **does not have a dedicated AV1 hardware encoder**. Encoding to AV1 will always use the CPU via `libsvtav1`.
- **Why use SVT-AV1?**: SVT-AV1 is highly optimized for modern CPUs and provides significantly better compression than older hardware encoders.
- **Transcoding Failures**: The `code 171` error you saw in Jellyfin happened because the GPU was asked to do something it couldn't handle (or the driver crashed). By pre-converting to AV1 using the CPU, we ensure the file is in a modern format that the GPU can easily **decode** (playback) later.

If you absolutely require GPU-accelerated encoding, you would need to use HEVC (`-c:v hevc_vaapi`), but AV1 (CPU) is recommended for long-term storage and compatibility.

## How it works

1.  **Scanning**: Uses `Bun.Glob` to recursively find common video extensions.
2.  **Analysis**: Runs `ffprobe` on each file to detect video and audio codecs.
3.  **Encoding**: If a legacy codec is found, it triggers `ffmpeg` to:
    - Encode video to AV1 using `libsvtav1`.
    - **Audio Modernization**: If legacy audio codecs (like `cook`, `wmav2`, `sipr`) are detected, they are automatically re-encoded to **Opus** (128k) to ensure compatibility with modern containers and players.
    - Copy standard audio and subtitle streams (`-c:a copy -c:s copy`) when safe.
    - Output to a `.av1.mkv` file.
4.  **Verification**: Only if `ffmpeg` exits successfully, the script marks the conversion as complete.
5.  **Cleanup**: If `--delete-original` is set, it removes the old file and renames the new one to the original name (with `.mkv` extension).

## Troubleshooting

- **FFmpeg error code 171**: This script helps avoid this error by pre-converting files that would otherwise fail during real-time hardware transcoding in Jellyfin.
- **Speed**: AV1 encoding is CPU intensive. Adjust `--preset` (e.g., to `8` or `10`) for faster but slightly less efficient encoding.

Commit message:

📝 docs: add background execution guide using tmux to media-converter.md

docs/media-converter.md, after:

# AV1 Media Converter

A Bun-based utility script to scan media libraries for legacy video codecs and convert them to modern AV1 format. This helps resolve transcoding issues in Jellyfin and reduces storage usage.

## Overview

The script targets several "legacy" codecs that often cause issues with modern hardware acceleration or player compatibility:
- `mpeg4` (Xvid, DivX)
- `msmpeg4v3`
- `mpeg2video` (DVD)
- `vc1` (Early Blu-ray)
- `theora`, `vp8`, `h263`, `flv1`, `rv40` (RealVideo)

It uses `ffprobe` to identify codecs and `ffmpeg` with the `libsvtav1` encoder for high-quality AV1 compression.

## Prerequisites

- **Bun**: To run the script.
- **FFmpeg**: Must be compiled with `libsvtav1` support.
- **FFprobe**: For media analysis.

## Usage

### On Skylab (NixOS)
The script is globally available on Skylab as `av1-converter`.

### On Local Computer (Global Installation)
To install the tool globally on your local machine using Bun:

```bash
cd scripts/av1-converter
bun add -g .
```

### Direct Execution
You can also run it using Bun directly:

```bash
# From the root of the repository
bun scripts/av1-converter/src/index.ts [options]
```

### Options

| Option | Alias | Description | Default |
|--------|-------|-------------|---------|
| `--dir` | `-d` | Directory to scan recursively | `.` |
| `--limit` | `-l` | Max number of files to convert | Infinity |
| `--dry-run` | | Scan and identify files without converting | `false` |
| `--preset` | | Encoding preset (ultrafast, medium, slow, etc.) | `medium` |
| `--crf` | | SVT-AV1 quality (0-63, lower is higher quality) | `24` |
| `--verbose` | `-v` | Show ffmpeg output and full command line | `false` |

### Understanding CRF and Preset

These two parameters control the balance between quality, file size, and encoding time.

#### 1. CRF (Constant Rate Factor)
- **Range**: `0` (lossless) to `63` (worst quality).
- **Function**: Ensures a constant perceptual quality level.
- **Recommendations**:
    - `18-24`: High quality, larger files.
    - `30`: The "sweet spot" for AV1 (excellent quality/size ratio).
    - `35+`: Noticeable compression artifacts, very small files.

#### 2. Preset
- **Options**: `ultrafast`, `superfast`, `veryfast`, `faster`, `fast`, `medium`, `slow`, `slower`, `veryslow`, `placebo`.
- **Function**: Determines how much "effort" the CPU spends on compression.
- **Recommendations**:
    - `medium`: (Default) Balanced. Best for archiving.
    - `fast` / `faster`: Much faster, good for quick conversions or less critical media.
    - `slow` / `slower`: Better compression, slower encoding.

| `--upscale-to`| | Upscale video if height is below target (e.g., `720p`) | None |
| `--delete-original`| | Delete the original file after success | `false` |

### Examples

**Dry run to see what would be converted:**
```bash
bun scripts/av1-converter/src/index.ts --dir /path/to/movies --dry-run
```

**Upscale old movies to 720p:**
```bash
bun scripts/av1-converter/src/index.ts --dir /path/to/movies --upscale-to 720p
```

**Convert 2 files for testing:**
```bash
bun scripts/av1-converter/src/index.ts --dir /path/to/movies --limit 2 --preset fast
```

**Full conversion with cleanup:**
```bash
bun scripts/av1-converter/src/index.ts --dir /share/Storage/Movies --delete-original
```

### Running in Background

Since video encoding takes a long time, it is recommended to run the script inside a `tmux` session. This allows you to disconnect from SSH while the conversion continues.

1.  **Start a new session**: `tmux new -s conversion`
2.  **Run the script**: `av1-converter --dir /path/to/media --upscale-to 720p`
3.  **Detach**: Press `Ctrl+b` then `d`.
4.  **Re-attach later**: `tmux attach -t conversion`

For more details, see the [Tmux Guide](./tmux.md).

## Hardware Acceleration Note

On the **Skylab (Intel NUC Hades Canyon)**:
- **AV1 Encoding**: This hardware (Intel 8th Gen / AMD Vega M) **does not have a dedicated AV1 hardware encoder**. Encoding to AV1 will always use the CPU via `libsvtav1`.
- **Why use SVT-AV1?**: SVT-AV1 is highly optimized for modern CPUs and provides significantly better compression than older hardware encoders.
- **Transcoding Failures**: The `code 171` error you saw in Jellyfin happened because the GPU was asked to do something it couldn't handle (or the driver crashed). By pre-converting to AV1 using the CPU, we ensure the file is in a modern format that the GPU can easily **decode** (playback) later.

If you absolutely require GPU-accelerated encoding, you would need to use HEVC (`-c:v hevc_vaapi`), but AV1 (CPU) is recommended for long-term storage and compatibility.

## How it works

1.  **Scanning**: Uses `Bun.Glob` to recursively find common video extensions.
2.  **Analysis**: Runs `ffprobe` on each file to detect video and audio codecs.
3.  **Encoding**: If a legacy codec is found, it triggers `ffmpeg` to:
    - Encode video to AV1 using `libsvtav1`.
    - **Audio Modernization**: If legacy audio codecs (like `cook`, `wmav2`, `sipr`) are detected, they are automatically re-encoded to **Opus** (128k) to ensure compatibility with modern containers and players.
    - Copy standard audio and subtitle streams (`-c:a copy -c:s copy`) when safe.
    - Output to a `.av1.mkv` file.
4.  **Verification**: Only if `ffmpeg` exits successfully, the script marks the conversion as complete.
5.  **Cleanup**: If `--delete-original` is set, it removes the old file and renames the new one to the original name (with `.mkv` extension).

## Troubleshooting

- **FFmpeg error code 171**: This script helps avoid this error by pre-converting files that would otherwise fail during real-time hardware transcoding in Jellyfin.
- **Speed**: AV1 encoding is CPU intensive. Adjust `--preset` (e.g., to `8` or `10`) for faster but slightly less efficient encoding.
